Emile or On Education is a philosophical dissertation by the 17th century philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau on the proper education of the youth. Told through the narrative upbringing of a fictional boy Emile, Rousseau outlines the stages of life from boyhood to adulthood and the lessons suited to each to produce a man of sound mind, sensitive soul, and courageous heart. This book is largely credited with revolutionizing the perspective of children as being a bundle of ill-behaviours meant to be forcefully molded into civilized behaviours to an empty innocent receptacle into which cultivation is inculcated through proper education. Emile's education might today be likened to the methods of Montessori; that is, child-centred, hands on, and exploratory. Science is taught only to answer curiosities, not to drum into a young mind cold monotonous and useless terminology. Respect for elders is taught through enlarging empathy, not as a seemingly arbitrary dictate. Religion is taught as a personal connection that the inner-spirit can seek out and convene with, not as unquestioned tradition imposing a burdensome conscience. And love is taught as devotion to an ideal, not as the lustful pursuit of objects. 

Rousseau is a polarizing figure. He himself fathered five children, all of whom he abandoned to an orphanage. I would be remiss not to remark that one should be wary of taking advise from those who do not follow it themselves. But if ever there was an exception to the rule, it is Rousseau. If it is the case that Rousseau reads as a magnanimous and deeply humane figure, while in his personal life falling well short of his own standards, we are still so much the better for having his fictions rather than having his facts. Whether or not you agree with his arguments--as I often do not myself--it is undeniable that his prose style is one of the most forceful, compelling, and beautiful of all of philosophy. It is worthwhile reading him if only to get a sense of the way in which he turns words on the page into music for the mind. 

