public/website-posts/content/Homepage.md, before:

## About Me
My name is Adam Smith-Orlik and I am currently a PhD candidate at York University in Toronto, Ontario under the guidance of [Dr. Sean Tulin](https://www.yorku.ca/stulin/) . I have a Masters degree in Physics from York University and a Bachelors in Physics with minors in Math and Philosophy from Carleton University. My current [research](/research) borders on computational and theoretical physics of dark matter; namely, investigating the cosmological effects of self-interacting dark matter on the morphology of dark matter halos by solving the semi-analytic Jeans equation in two dimensions (papers forthcoming). During my Masters I also worked with [Dr. Nassim Bozorgnia](https://apps.ualberta.ca/directory/person/bozorgni) on a project that investigated the [impact of the Large Magellanic Cloud on dark matter direct detection signals](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.04281). Additionally, working as a junior mentor with [EXPLORE](https://dmgw.space/EXPLORE)--a research focused cross-collaboration course--I worked on a novel approach for computing the [Post-Newtonian effect in compact binaries with a dark matter spike](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.06084). While my research focuses mainly on dark matter, my interest in physics extends to mathematical physics, particle physics, general relativity, and cosmology. 

Of late I have become increasingly interested in [physical fitness](https://www.instagram.com/natty_addy14/). Leveraging my education, and the scientific frame of mind it inculcated, I have applied the knowledge from science-based fitness literature to optimize my own fitness-related goals and outcomes. Utilizing data-analysis and coding skills I have undertaken various projects to track progress and fine-tune my training protocols to achieve my training goals. In the process I have begun helping others apply the same tools and techniques to achieve their own goals. At the time of writing I have made programs for and monitored the progress of ten individuals, helping each to navigate the confusing, intimidating, oft-contradictory, gate-kept, and pay-walled fitness industry. 

In my spare time I enjoy reading Russian literature from the Golden Era (Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Pushkin, and Chekhov) Philosophy or philosophical literature, classics, and the occasional math or physics textbook. I also love sports; playing sports is the only time I truly feel like I'm in the right place. I play hockey, golf, volleyball, and tennis. However, tennis has become my main passion since the beginning of covid. In the summers I try to play at least three times a week, so if you're looking for a hitting partner send me a message!

This website is a side project of mine, built entirely from scratch using react and vite, written in HTML, CSS and typescript as an exercise in coding. I plan on using it mainly as space to host my writing and keep track of my various passion projects.

Commit message:

Added reading page and fixed some sizes.

public/website-posts/content/Homepage.md, after:

## About Me
My name is Adam Smith-Orlik and I am currently a PhD candidate at York University in Toronto, Ontario under the guidance of [Dr. Sean Tulin](https://www.yorku.ca/stulin/) . I have a Masters degree in Physics from York University and a Bachelors in Physics with minors in Math and Philosophy from Carleton University. My current [research](/research) borders on computational and theoretical physics of dark matter; namely, investigating the cosmological effects of self-interacting dark matter on the morphology of dark matter halos by solving the semi-analytic Jeans equation in two dimensions (papers forthcoming). During my Masters I also worked with [Dr. Nassim Bozorgnia](https://apps.ualberta.ca/directory/person/bozorgni) on a project that investigated the [impact of the Large Magellanic Cloud on dark matter direct detection signals](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.04281). Additionally, working as a junior mentor with [EXPLORE](https://dmgw.space/EXPLORE)--a research focused cross-collaboration course--I worked on a novel approach for computing the [Post-Newtonian effect in compact binaries with a dark matter spike](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.06084). While my research focuses mainly on dark matter, my interest in physics extends to mathematical physics, particle physics, general relativity, and cosmology. 

Of late I have become increasingly interested in [physical fitness](https://www.instagram.com/natty_addy14/). Leveraging my education, and the scientific frame of mind it inculcated, I have applied the knowledge from science-based fitness literature to optimize my own fitness-related goals and outcomes. Utilizing data-analysis and coding skills I have undertaken various projects to track progress and fine-tune my training protocols to achieve my training goals. In the process I have begun helping others apply the same tools and techniques to achieve their own goals. At the time of writing I have made programs for and monitored the progress of ten individuals, helping each to navigate the confusing, intimidating, oft-contradictory, gate-kept, and pay-walled fitness industry. 

When I was at the tender age of 12 I happened upon a copy of Aristotle's Politics in a box of my Dad's old University books. Some unknown force compelled me to start reading, if scanning big words I didn't know then can be called reading. Whatever the force was that compelled me then only picked up momentum over the years. By the time I had made it to University myself I was nose-deep in Russian Literature, Existentialist Philosophy, and Classics. Through reading I came to be a great admirer of the art of writing, and, as Saul Bellow says, "a writer is a reader moved to emulation," whence arose my passion for writing. Part of the motivation for making this webpage is to have a space to host my [writing](/writing). 

This website is a side project of mine, built entirely from scratch using React and Vite, written in HTML, CSS and typescript as an exercise in coding.
