public/website-posts/content/Research.md, before:

## Self-Interacting Dark Matter and the Jeans Model 
My main research project concerns the effect of self-interacting dark matter (\\( \rm SIDM \\)) on the morphology of dark matter halos.  \\( \\Lambda \rm CDM \\) is the current standard cosmological model, wherein the structure of the Universe is dictated by the cosmological constant, \\( \\Lambda \\), and a cold, collisionless, dark matter component, \\( \rm CDM \\). However, on length scales less than an \\( \rm Mpc \\) \\( \rm CDM \\) faces challenges. Namely, observations of dwarf and low-surface-brightness dark matter (DM) halos prefer nearly constant density cores, while \\( \rm CDM \\)-only simulations predict cores with a steep rising density called a cusp. The so-called core-cusp problem motivated the self-interacting model, proposed by Spergel and Steindhart in 1999. This model modifies the inner, dense part of the halo where interactions are frequent while retaining the \\( \rm CDM \\)-like properties in the outer halo where interactions are rare enough to treat the region as effectively collisionless, making it a lightweight and economical solution to the core-cusp problem.  

Apart from producing the cored profiles required by observation, frequent self-interaction also tend to erase ellipticity, causing halos to be more spherical than predicted by \\( \rm CDM \\) simulations. This predication of \\( \rm SIDM \\)halos provides an observational probe with which researchers can distinguish between \\( \rm CDM \\) and \\( \rm SIDM \\), possibly uncovering clues as to the particle nature of DM. 

As simulations have become more sophisticated it became possible to model DM halos with baryonic matter. Depending on the implementation of baryonic physics, the core-cusp problem is eased. However, one issue that persists is that of the diversity of rotation curves for similar DM halos. \\( \rm CDM \\) predicts a universal profile that depends on the halo mass. However, the inner part of rotation curves is observed to be much more diverse than expected in \\( \rm CDM \\) and has not been explained with the inclusion of baryons in simulations. \\( \rm SIDM \\) simulations with baryons, however, does lead to the expected diversity observed owing to the response of \\( \rm SIDM \\) to the baryon potential. The potential of \\( \rm SIDM \\) to solve this lingering problem of diversity constitutes the main appeal of the model at the present time. 

 In recent literature the Jeans model has been shown to reproduce the correct spherically averaged density of \\( \rm SIDM \\) halos with similar precision--10 to 20 percent--to the NFW profile for  \\( \rm CDM \\) halos. This surprising success has bolstered the status of the Jeans model as a useful complementary tool when confronting the predictions of \\( \rm SIDM \\) with observations. Being computationally inexpensive, unlike fully hydrodynamical simulations, the Jeans model is able to test a large section of the parameter space. However, since the Jeans model is non-dynamical, it can only test the weaker condition of consistency rather than whether such a system will arise in the context of \\( \rm SIDM \\) halo evolution. The silver lining is that, being non-dynamical, the Jeans model can fix observed properties of halos, where, with simulations one is required to generate large ensembles to match average properties of real halos. 

My work focuses on the extension of the Jeans model to higher dimensions, beyond the assumption of spherical symmetry. This allows the prediction of the shape of the halo as a function of radius. As mentioned, the shape is a useful probe of \\( \rm SIDM \\) cosmology, the more so for halos in the intermediate mass range with strong baryonic components, where the effect due to baryons in \\( \rm SIDM \\) halos can mimic the cuspy cores of  \\( \rm CDM \\) halos. For these halos the  \\( \rm CDM \\) and \\( \rm SIDM \\) density profiles can be indistinguishable. Having shape information allows one to break the degeneracy in these cases to determine \\( \rm SIDM \\) from their \\( \rm CDM \\) counterparts. 

We have tested this model on a suite of simulations generated with a cross-section of \\( 1 \rm cm^2/g \\) and baryons. The results of Monte Carlo Markov Chains (MCMC) show that the marginalized posteriors are centred around the true cross-section of  \\( 1 \rm cm^2/g \\), while the previous spherical model struggles to fit systems for which the spherically averaged densities are similar. These results imply that the two-dimensional Jeans model can be used as an effective tool to distinguish \\( \rm SIDM \\) from \\( \rm CDM\\) when shape information is available. Using X-ray shape data along the line of sight, the Jeans model can constrain the cross-section of observed halos. 

The details of the nonspherical as somewhat technical, but the short of it is as follows: 

## Gravitational Waves and Dark Matter Spikes
Binary black hole mergers have become a topic of extreme interest following the observation of the first gravitational waves on Earth in 2015. This observation opened a new frontier for astronomy, a new window into the inner-workings of the Universe. When two black holes merge, in what is one of the most violent events to take place in the Universe, the very fabric of spacetime is perturbed in such a way as to send gravitational waves rippling through space. Think a large boulder hitting a placid lake. Large waves propagate out from the center in all directions. The same happens with black hole mergers, but instead of water carrying the waves, its spacetime. The signature of these waves is well understood and predicted within General Relativity. However, minor differences in these waveforms can provide information about the medium through which the gravitational waves travelled before detection. 

In particular, dark matter is expected to accrue around black holes, forming so-called dark matter spikes. Due to the large gravitational potential of black holes, the density of dark matter can be extremely large in the region surrounding the binary. Depending on the model, \\( \rm CDM \\) or \\( \rm SIDM \\), the waveforms from the merger can bear the signature of the dark matter through which it traveled. 

My work on gravitational waves and dark matter spikes proposed a Lagrangian method to calculate the Post-Newtonian corrections to the expected gravitational waveforms in the case of fully relativistic dark matter spikes. We found that the waveform is predictably different for the case of a relativistic dark matter spike, offering a new analytic method for solving for such waveforms giving certain properties of the dark matter and the black holes. 

## The Impact of the LMC on Direct Detection of Dark Matter in the Milky Way 



Aenean euismod bibendum laoreet. \\[ \\int_{-\\infty}^{\\infty} e^{-x^2} dx = \\sqrt{\\pi} \\]

Commit message:

Fixed some size issues. Finished research page.

public/website-posts/content/Research.md, after:

## Self-Interacting Dark Matter and the Jeans Model 
My main research project concerns the effect of self-interacting dark matter (\\( \rm SIDM \\)) on the morphology of dark matter halos.  \\( \\Lambda \rm CDM \\) is the current standard cosmological model, wherein the structure of the Universe is dictated by the cosmological constant, \\( \\Lambda \\), and a cold, collisionless, dark matter component, \\( \rm CDM \\). However, on length scales less than an \\( \rm Mpc \\) \\( \rm CDM \\) faces challenges. Namely, observations of dwarf and low-surface-brightness dark matter (DM) halos prefer nearly constant density cores, while \\( \rm CDM \\)-only simulations predict cores with a steep rising density called a cusp. The so-called core-cusp problem motivated the self-interacting model, proposed by Spergel and Steindhart in 1999. This model modifies the inner, dense part of the halo where interactions are frequent while retaining the \\( \rm CDM \\)-like properties in the outer halo where interactions are rare enough to treat the region as effectively collisionless, making it a lightweight and economical solution to the core-cusp problem.  

Apart from producing the cored profiles required by observation, frequent self-interaction also tend to erase ellipticity, causing halos to be more spherical than predicted by \\( \rm CDM \\) simulations. This predication of \\( \rm SIDM \\)halos provides an observational probe with which researchers can distinguish between \\( \rm CDM \\) and \\( \rm SIDM \\), possibly uncovering clues as to the particle nature of DM. 

As simulations have become more sophisticated it became possible to model DM halos with baryonic matter. Depending on the implementation of baryonic physics, the core-cusp problem is eased. However, one issue that persists is that of the diversity of rotation curves for similar DM halos. \\( \rm CDM \\) predicts a universal profile that depends on the halo mass. However, the inner part of rotation curves is observed to be much more diverse than expected in \\( \rm CDM \\) and has not been explained with the inclusion of baryons in simulations. \\( \rm SIDM \\) simulations with baryons, however, does lead to the expected diversity observed owing to the response of \\( \rm SIDM \\) to the baryon potential. The potential of \\( \rm SIDM \\) to solve this lingering problem of diversity constitutes the main appeal of the model at the present time. 

 In recent literature the Jeans model has been shown to reproduce the correct spherically averaged density of \\( \rm SIDM \\) halos with similar precision--10 to 20 percent--to the NFW profile for  \\( \rm CDM \\) halos. This surprising success has bolstered the status of the Jeans model as a useful complementary tool when confronting the predictions of \\( \rm SIDM \\) with observations. Being computationally inexpensive, unlike fully hydrodynamical simulations, the Jeans model is able to test a large section of the parameter space. However, since the Jeans model is non-dynamical, it can only test the weaker condition of consistency rather than whether such a system will arise in the context of \\( \rm SIDM \\) halo evolution. The silver lining is that, being non-dynamical, the Jeans model can fix observed properties of halos, where, with simulations one is required to generate large ensembles to match average properties of real halos. 

My work focuses on the extension of the Jeans model to higher dimensions, beyond the assumption of spherical symmetry. This allows the prediction of the shape of the halo as a function of radius. As mentioned, the shape is a useful probe of \\( \rm SIDM \\) cosmology, the more so for halos in the intermediate mass range with strong baryonic components, where the effect due to baryons in \\( \rm SIDM \\) halos can mimic the cuspy cores of  \\( \rm CDM \\) halos. For these halos the  \\( \rm CDM \\) and \\( \rm SIDM \\) density profiles can be indistinguishable. Having shape information allows one to break the degeneracy in these cases to determine \\( \rm SIDM \\) from their \\( \rm CDM \\) counterparts. 

We have tested this model on a suite of simulations generated with a cross-section of \\( 1 \rm cm^2/g \\) and baryons. The results of Monte Carlo Markov Chains (MCMC) show that the marginalized posteriors are centred around the true cross-section of  \\( 1 \rm cm^2/g \\), while the previous spherical model struggles to fit systems for which the spherically averaged densities are similar. These results imply that the two-dimensional Jeans model can be used as an effective tool to distinguish \\( \rm SIDM \\) from \\( \rm CDM\\) when shape information is available. Using X-ray shape data along the line of sight, the Jeans model can constrain the cross-section of observed halos. 

## Gravitational Waves and Dark Matter Spikes
Binary black hole mergers have become a topic of extreme interest following the observation of the first gravitational waves on Earth in 2015. This observation opened a new frontier for astronomy, a new window into the inner-workings of the Universe. When two black holes merge, in what is one of the most violent events to take place in the Universe, the very fabric of spacetime is perturbed in such a way as to send gravitational waves rippling through space. Think a large boulder hitting a placid lake. Large waves propagate out from the center in all directions. The same happens with black hole mergers, but instead of water carrying the waves, its spacetime. The signature of these waves is well understood and predicted within General Relativity. However, minor differences in these waveforms can provide information about the medium through which the gravitational waves travelled before detection. 

In particular, dark matter is expected to accrue around black holes, forming so-called dark matter spikes. Due to the large gravitational potential of black holes, the density of dark matter can be extremely large in the region surrounding the binary. Depending on the model, \\( \rm CDM \\) or \\( \rm SIDM \\), the waveforms from the merger can bear the signature of the dark matter through which it traveled. 

My work on gravitational waves and dark matter spikes proposed a Lagrangian method to calculate the Post-Newtonian corrections to the expected gravitational waveforms in the case of fully relativistic dark matter spikes. We found that the waveform is predictably different for the case of a relativistic dark matter spike, offering a new analytic method for solving for such waveforms giving certain properties of the dark matter and the black holes. 

For more information you can read our paper on the arXiv [here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.06084).

## The Impact of the LMC on Direct Detection of Dark Matter in the Milky Way 
Dark matter direct detection experiments seek to detect WIMPs (Weakly Interacting Massive Particles), which, as the name suggests, interact weakly with Standard Model particles. Large detectors filled with noble gases are placed deep underground around the world in radio-pure environments waiting to detect one such interaction that would give direct evidence of dark matter; yet none have made a positive detection to date. As part of their models, these direct detection experiments make some assumptions about dark matter–its properties, its velocity distribution, and its density near Earth–that inform the expectations for a possible detection. The basic set of assumptions are known as the Standard Halo Model (SHM). 

However, the SHM is known to be a simplified model and does not take into account various perturbers of the Milky Way's (MW) dark matter halo. For example, the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC)–a massive satellite galaxy that orbits the MW–is thought to be near its first pericenter (closest) passage to the MW. It is believed that a recent passage of such a large satellite galaxy with its own dark matter halo could have a large impact on the MW's own dark matter halo–from gravitational perturbing of the MW halo to high speed DM particles from the LMC falling into the MW halo. The latter possibility bears important consequences for the direct detection of DM particles, where experiments are especially sensitive the the high velocity tail of the DM velocity distribution. If there are more DM particles than expected at high velocities, due to infall from the recent LMC passage, then the models that experiments use would need to be updated. 

To investigate this possibility we used hydrodynamical simulations from the Auriga project and found MW-LMC analogues, that is, galaxy systems in the simulations that resembled the MW with a satellite galaxy like the LMC that had recently orbited its host galaxy. We then analyzed a set of analogues to understand how the recent passage of a satellite around its host galaxy affected the host's DM halo. 

What we found was that the recent passage of an LMC-like satellite around a MW-like host galaxy increased the incidence of high velocity DM particles in the Solar region of the MW-like DM halo. This population of high speed DM particles has a non-negligible impact on the velocity distribution of DM in the Solar region, one of the key astrophysical inputs to the direct detection models, and leads to and order of magnitude or greater shift in the sensitivity of experiments, especially for low mass DM models. 

For more information you can read our paper on the arXiv [here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2302.04281).
