Outside of physics and fitness, I spend the majority of my time reading, writing, and playing sports. When I was 12 years old I found an old copy of *Aristotles Politics* in my Father's collection of books from his University days. I've no clue what possessed me to attempt to read it, and "attempt" is perhaps too generous a word still, but read it I did. I remember being shocked by the ideas I encountered therein--chief among them an attack on democracy and a defence of slavery. At 12 years old I didn't know much but I did know that democracy was good and slavery was bad. This marks possibly the first time I can recall when what I thought I knew to be absolutely true was challenged. The feeling I then had was one of unbearable discomfort. I knew Aristotle must be wrong, but I didn't know why or where he was wrong, much less did I know how to begin to articulate a counter-argument. 

The next portentous event was owed to my brother, Jordan. Being 8 years my senior he often would mess with me, as all older brothers do. One day he asked me "do you believe in God?" to which I responded "of course I do" (at the time I'd never questioned it, after all I used to pray during hockey games that God would allow me to score a goal!). He took a beat then replied "why," after which he buzzed off, happy to leave me with the torment of an existential question I suppose. In fact the simple "why" was enough to completely restructure neural pathways. Again the uncomfortable feeling of not knowing stirred my soul. 


--
Reading has long been my primary passion. To be sure, it was a deep curiosity and finding an outlet in books that first led me to read about physics. I did not know it at the time, but picking up A Brief History of Time by Stephen Hawking was to dictate the trajectory of my life profoundly. Entering University exposed 

--
While I have always enjoyed reading, it was due to reading a copy of War and Peace by Leo Tolstoy in the first year of my undergrad that rewired my brain permanently. In a few short years following War and Peace I devoured large portions of Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Solzhenitsyn, Gogol, and Chekhov. Through the Russian Literature I had made contact with Existentialism, pursing the works of Camus, Sartre, Kafka, and Nietzsche. Through Existentialism I came to appreciate philosophy in general, becoming enthralled by the works of Epicurus, Plato, Hume, Russell and Nozick. Following these threads I also became preoccupied with the question of God and atheism, finding refuge in the mid-2000s movement of New Atheism. Authors like Dawkins, Harris, and Hitchens did much to satiate my desire for a consistent, secular, and scientific worldview, while the latter--Hitchens--for a long while became my primary role model. Through Christopher Hitchens I have developed an abiding love for free-thought, contrarianism, writing, debate, and secular-humanistic civilization. These 